Add TAP for client initialization and metadata backstop (#128)
theupdateframework/taps: tap15.md

* TAP: TBD
* Title: TUF Metadata Initialization and Backstop
* Version: 1.0.0
* Last-Modified: 04-11-2020
* Author: Erick Tryzelaar
* Status: Draft
* Content-Type: text/markdown
* Requires: <TAP numbers>
* Created: 18-September-2020
* TUF-Version: 1.0.10
* Post-History: <dates of postings to the TUF mailing list>

# Abstract

This TAP describes how a client should initialize a client with local metadata,
and impose a metadata backstop to limit the range of a potential rollback
attack during client initialization.

# Motivation

One of the attacks [TUF] protects against is a rollback attack, where an
attacker tricks a client into using older metadata in order to install a
vulnerable target. TUF protects against this by requiring all new metadata must

> have a version number greater than the current version. However, TUF is still

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have a version number greater or equal to the current version. However, TUF is still
```

vulnerable to two other avenues to trigger a rollback:

* An initializing client may not have any trusted metadata, so a
  man-in-the-middle attacker could serve older versions of metadata that
  include a vulnerable target.
* A local attacker could replace the local trusted metadata with older versions
  of metadata.

TUF provides some protection of this rollback during initialization:

* Clients are initialized with a trusted root metadata. This limits a
  man-in-the-middle to only being able to trick an initializing client into
  installing metadata that was signed by the keys in the trusted root.
* Checking for metadata expiration limits a man-in-the-middle to only being
  able to trick an initializing client into installing unexpired metadata.

Unfortunately these have limitations:

* Rotating the keys in the root role can be a complicated manual process, so
  it’s expected to be infrequently performed. This can give a man-in-the-middle

>   a serve a wide range of old metadata.

Reviewer 2: Grammatical error on this line...

* Snapshot: version, and optionally size and hashes

With this, the client can implement two strategies:

* Fetch the backstop metadata during initialization and use it as the initial
  trusted Snapshot,
* Or, when updating the Snapshot, reject it if it’s version is less than the
  backstop version.

However, this approach has a few downsides:

* By fetching metadata during initialization:
  * it may reveal to a repository that a client is initializing. This could be
    alleviated by a client trying to first fetch the backstop metadata from a
    local store.
    * A repository may accidentally remove old metadata.
    * A specific Snapshot metadata cannot be fetched from a repository with
      inconsistent snapshots.
* By just checking the backstop version, it’s possible an attacker that has
  stolen the Snapshot Keys can trick a system into rolling back the Targets or
  Delegated Targets roles.

# Specification

This proposes changing the TUF specification in order to enable clients to
integrate into one of these trusted boot mechanisms.

(Note: all proposed changes to the TUF spec are in _italics_):

...

> _**5.0**. **Load the initial root metadata file.** We assume that a good, trusted

Reviewer 3: The proposed spec changes overall look great, but would benefit from theupdateframework/specification#121 in the future to remove some duplication.

    attack._

* _**5.9.5**. **Check for a rollback attack, against the trusted metadata.**_

  * _**5.9.5.1**. The version number of the targets metadata file, and all
    delegated targets files, in the trusted snapshot metadata file, if any,
    MUST be less than or equal to the version number in the new snapshot
    metadata file. Furthermore, any targets metadata filename that was listed
    in the trusted snapshot metadata file, if any, MUST continue to be listed
    in the new snapshot metadata file. If any of these conditions are not met,
    discard the new snapshot metadata file, abort the update cycle, and report
    the failure._

  * _**5.4.5.2**. If the version numbers of the targets metadata file, and any
    delegated targets files, in the trusted snapshot metadata file equals its
    version number in the new snapshot metadata file, then the trusted targets
    metadata hashes, and any delegated targets metadata hashes, if any, MUST
    equal the hashes in the new snapshot metadata file. If not, discard the new
    snapshot metadata file, abort the update cycle, and report the potential
    rollback attack._

*   ...

> # Security Analysis

Reviewer 3: It might be worth mentioning a fast forward attack on the backstop snapshot metadata (ie backstop metadata with very high version numbers). It looks like this is mitigated by deleting fast-forwarded snapshot metadata in section 5.7.10, but an explicit mention here might be helpful.
